# Data Driven - The hype of becoming rational
The first time I heard about Data Science I had already been studying statistics for almost five years. For me it was kind of a revelations since I finally knew where I could apply everything I learnt in university. Since then my understanding of the field hasn‘t changed, although I met a lot of people that have a completely different understanding. So far there is no ultimate definition of Data Science and it is often mentioned along Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence. What all those buzzwords have in common is, that they are all subordinated to the much more fancier buzzword of „data driven“.

A quick google search reveals: „data-driven means that progress in an activity is compelled by data rather than by intuition or personal experience.“ So this means, that your favourite hotel booking website doesn‘t recommend you the CEO‘s favourite hotel, but rather the best choice based on reviews of previous hotel guests. Your favourite online shop doesn‘t show you the Lead Developers favourite book, instead they show you the product you are most likely to buy, based on the past behaviour of other customers. But data driven doesn‘t only apply to online shops.
Would you rather take a pill that was clinically tested on multiple different patients or a pill your doctor has a good feeling about? Would you cancel your Saturday afternoon barbecue, because your aunt has the feeling, that is going to rain? Or are you going to tell her to take her feelings to her next meeting with her shaman. Because you trust in all the experts, that sit on loads of meteorological data gather for the last couple of years, deduce statistical dependencies from that data and use those to make the scientifically sound forecast that the weather will be fine?

Two of the examples above are from fields that are around for a very long time. But why are all the companies desperately looking for data engineers, data scientists and other professionals, that like to star at numbers the whole day? Why are methods, developed a few decades ago to analyse results of biological experiments and models developed to simulate the human brain, now used to identify cats in images and to recommend you which unnecessary gadget you should buy together with your new iPhone?

The main reason is the development in computer sciences. Collecting and storing data gets cheaper every day and processing power is skyrocketing. Furthermore the success of data driven companies like google, facebook and amazon scares the shit out of more conservative companies. That is why the demand for „data driven“ employees has been rising the past few years, and that is why every company is trying to become „data driven“. But what exactly does it even mean for a company to become „data driven“? More important... what does it mean for you to be data driven?

## Data Driven is a mindset

Data-driven means that progress in an activity is compelled by data rather than by intuition or personal experience!
