# Machine Learning - The shining star of the data age
Self-driving cars, automatically created personalized playlists and deep fake are concepts that come along with the current data hype. The one may revolutionize the way we travel, the other is a nice convenience to discover new songs you might like and the third one is mainly used to synthesize celebrities faces into porn movies. What all three have in common is, that they all somehow satisfy specific demands and more importantly are all achieved by the use of Machine Learning techniques.

Machine Learning is a subfield of Artificial Intelligence that studies algorithms and statistical models that computer systems can use to perform specific tasks without using explicit instructions.

Doesn‘t sound very trivial. Does it?

So let‘s start at the beginning.

According to wikipedia AI was born in 1956. Without going to much into details, AI is the part of Computer Sciences focused on automating intelligent behavior. Of course one could discuss what is „intelligent behavior“ and what isn‘t, but for now I leave this distinction to you. If it helps you understand the concept of Machine Learning and the difference between Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence you are free to call Artificial Intelligence whatever resembles an automated intelligent behavior to you. Even Jerry‘s chatbot (yes that stupid fucker Jerry from Accounting) that answers „yes that sounds like a good idea“ to every e-mail with more than 50 words. More famous and less trivial examples of Artificial Intelligence are chess computers and roboters in factory assembly lines.

So what the fuck is Machine Learning now?
As already said Machine Learning is a part of Artificial Intelligence but the specific distinction between Machine Learning and other fields of Artificial Intelligence is that machines „learn“ intelligent behavior. Depending on your philosophical believes, you are either born as an empty sheet (a „tabula rasa“) and had to learn everything by sensual experience or there a few behavioral characteristics that were already implemented in your genes, or given to you by a higher divinity.

Maybe as footnote -	As a statistician I somehow wish the first statement is true. Since if everything you learn is from experience and experience can definitely be seen as data, this would mean that statistics is at the core of everything, but hopefully i will discuss this in another article.

Anyhow, even if you are a hardcore empiricist and pray every night to the lord and savior Francis Bacon you can admit, that there are a few examples of intelligent behavior where „learning“ from examples and experiences played a more important role than... whatever it is that taught you strategical thinking or running away from an angry animal.

I think it is safe to say that distinguishing a cat from a dog is an intelligent behavior, and way more complex than it may sounds, and playing chess is an intelligent act as well. But while it is easy to argue, that we learnt to distinguish a cat from a dog simply by experience. Probably most of us had seen thousands of examples of cats and dogs, because even before we were able to control when or where we get rid of our excrements, we are bombarded with statements like: „look at that nice woof-woof!“, „yeah, that is a friendly dog“ followed by a finger pointing at an example of men‘s best friend. In machine learning each of those impressions is called a labelled observation. Due to some magic in our brains we learn all the characteristics of a dog from all those examples. So once we are able to speak, we can point at a dog, that we have never seen before, say the word „dog“, make our parents proud for a short moment and go back to wetting our pants again.

But in contrast most of us are able to play chess, without having ever seen a chess game. It is enough that someone tells us the rules of the game and we are able to play and develop strategies. Of course „practice makes the master“ and chess masters have a lot of experience to learn from. But theoretically it is possible to foresee every possible constellation (at least for a finite number of turns) of the game and make the move with the best chances of winning in the end, solemnly by knowing the rules.

If you are currently doing your master‘s degree in philosophy with a focus on epistemology you probably have countless reasons for throwing away your tablet (smartphone, laptop or whatever) right now. But let me give you one final advice: go study something were you can do more than just talking and pretending you are better than everybody else. Leave that to us statisticians. To the ones still reading I hope you forgive me that for the sake of understanding the concept of Machine Learning I will now refer to intelligent behavior we learn from experience as „learned“ intelligence and every other intelligent behavior as „given“ (by god, your genetical heritage or whatever) intelligence. Because that is how I would best distinguish Machine Learning from „classical“, „non-Machine Learning“ Artificial Intelligence. In the former Machines learn intelligent behavior from experience, either by data they were given or by experience they gain theirselves by interacting with their environments. In the latter machines get their intelligent behavior from their developers. The developers give the machine a predefined logic for dealing with given tasks. The machine doesn‘t use any insights it gained from experience.

Nowadays there are quite a few people that wouldn’t make that fine distinction between Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, that I just did. Some would just say that Machine Learning is the new Artificial Intelligence. You could probably discuss whether Machine Learning is just some sort of Artificial Intelligence or actually is the NEW Artificial Intelligence for as long as you can discuss whether every intelligent behavior of people is learned from experience or not. To me there is a small distinction and I thought it worth discussing for people that aren’t that familiar with this field.

The success of companies like Google, Amazon, Facebook, Uber, and many more, that extensively apply Machine Learning to create services and automate their business processes, has created a Machine Learning hype. Since experience is the key to learning and for machines most of the experience they use for learning is given to them in the form of data, Machine Learning contributes to the much broader hype of ‚Data Driven‘. Although you can do much more with data than apply Machine Learning and it requires much more than Machine Learning to be fully data driven, Machine Learning is probably the shining star of data driven applications.